Add 'how to define spans' meta-guidance (#3240)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/how-to-write-conventions/README.md

#### Defining spans

Spans describe the individual execution of a certain operation.

Define spans when:

- The corresponding operation is important for observability.
- The operation has duration.

> - A new trace context should be created.

Reviewer: Should all or any of these conditions be fulfilled? Are any points optional?

Maybe consider similar phrasing to the `Defining attributes` conditions.

```suggestion
Define spans when all of the following apply:

- The corresponding operation is important for observability.
- The operation has duration.
- A new trace context should be created.
```

> - A new tracer context should be created.

Author: ```suggestion
- A new trace context should be created.
```

> Don't define spans for point-in-time telemetry that does not need new context - use events instead.

Author: great point, moved it to known exception note.

(unless they need unique context and are expected to become parents or be linked from
other spans).

Don't define spans if there is an existing span definition that captures a very similar
operation.

For example, a DB client span represents DB query execution from ORM or DB
driver perspectives. Both layers could be instrumented, but inner layers may be
suppressed to reduce duplication.

Don't try to capture all available properties as span attributes. Telemetry is
lossy, and it's important to assess the value-to-cost ratio of each referenced attribute.

Capture the details of that specific operation. Parent operations or sub-operations
will have their own spans.

For example, when recording a call to upload a file to an object store,
include the endpoint, collection, and object identifier. Don't include details of
the underlying HTTP/gRPC requests unless there is a strong reason to.

> [!NOTE]
> It's a common practice to accompany a span definition with a metric that measures
> the duration of the same operation type. For example, the `http.client.request.duration`
> metric is recorded alongside the corresponding HTTP client span.

> A span definition includes the following sections:

Reviewer 2: I didn't follow this line, is it a heading for the sections below?

##### What operation does this span represent

Define the scope and boundaries of the operation:

- When the span starts and ends.
- If this span represents a client call, specify whether it captures the logical call
  (as observed by the API caller) or the physical call (per-try/per-attempt).

> - Define a span per different operation type.

Reviewer 2: operation type -> span kind?

Author: updated to 

> - Define a different span for different operations - e.g., when spans have different
  kinds or a significantly different set of attributes.
  For example, HTTP client and server spans are two independent definitions.
  Messaging publishing and receiving are also different span types.

- Span names usually follow the `{action} {target}` pattern. For example, `send orders_queue`.

- Span names should only include information that's available as span attributes.
  I.e., `{action}` and `{target}` are usually also available as attributes and
  are used on metrics describing that operation.

- Static text should not be included, but can be used as a fallback.

  E.g., we use `GET /{controller}/{action}` instead of `HTTP GET /{controller}/{action}`.

- Provide fallback values in case some of the attributes used in the span name are not
  available or could be problematic in edge cases (e.g., have high cardinality).

- If a span name can become too long, recommend limits and truncation strategies
  (e.g., DB conventions define a 255-character limit).

##### Status

Define what constitutes an error for that operation.

If there are no special considerations, reference the [Recording errors](/recording-errors.md)
document.

Certain conditions can't be clearly classified as errors or not-errors (cancellations,
HTTP 404 and many others). Avoid using strict requirements - allow instrumentations

> to leverage context they might have to provide accurate status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to leverage context they might have to provide a more accurate status.
```

##### Kind

All span definitions MUST include a specific span kind. Don't mix definitions of
different span kinds.

##### Attributes

Define which additional properties this span needs to be useful:

- Include the `error.type` attribute. If the operation you're describing typically has a
  domain-specific error code, include that as a separate attribute as well.
  Document which error types and codes constitute an error.

- Include `server.address` and `server.port` on client spans.

- Include applicable `network.*` attributes on spans that describe network calls.

- Include some form of operation name that allows identifying different operations

>   of the same type.

Reviewer 2: "identifying different operations of the same type" seems vague

Maybe "important / useful categories of operations"?

Or could be even more specific and reframe it around {action} {target}?

  For example, in case of HTTP, it's `http.request.method`; in case of RPC,
  it's `rpc.method`; for messaging, `messaging.operation.name`; and for GenAI, `gen_ai.operation.name`.
  This attribute typically serves as the `{action}` in the span name and may be used
  across multiple span definitions within the same domain.

- Identify other important characteristics such as operation target (DB collection,
  messaging queue, GenAI model, object store collection), input parameters, and
  result properties that should be recorded on the span.

- When referencing attributes, refine its properties:
  - Specify if an attribute is relevant for head-sampling. Such attributes should be

>     provided at start time and would be passed to the sampler. Usually, these are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    provided at start time so that they will be passed to the sampler. Usually, these are
```

#### Defining spans

Spans describe the individual execution of a certain operation.

Define spans when:

- The corresponding operation is important for observability.
- The operation has duration.

Don't define spans for point-in-time occurrences - use events instead.

> Don't define spans for local-only operations, such as serialization or deserialization.

Reviewer 3: What's meant by local only? Does it include deserialization of an incoming (traced) request and serialization of the response that's returned?

Author: updated to 

> Don't define spans for short operations that don't involve out-of-process calls,
such as serialization or deserialization.

Let me know if there is some other form that you'd prefer.

> Does it include deserialization of an incoming (traced) request and serialization of the response that's returned?

Yep, I mean calls like `json.dumps(obj)` don't deserve a span in general case

For example, define spans for operations that involve one or more network calls.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Known exception: [messaging `create`](/docs/messaging/messaging-spans.md#operation-types) span
> is defined for a local call. This is necessary when publishing batches of
> messages to ensure each message has a unique context and can be traced
> individually end-to-end.

Don't define spans if there is an existing span definition that captures a very
similar operation.

For example, a DB client span represents DB query execution from ORM or DB
driver perspectives. Both layers could be instrumented, but inner layers may be
suppressed to reduce duplication.

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> It's a common practice to accompany a span definition with a metric that measures
> the duration of the same operation. For example, the `http.client.request.duration`
> metric is recorded alongside the corresponding HTTP client span.

A span definition should describe the operation it represents, include span kind,
naming pattern, considerations for setting span status, and the list of

> attributes refined for that span definition. Let's cover each aspect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
attributes defined for that span definition. Let's cover each aspect.
```
